xercise 1.1: Using Python as a Calculator
On your machine, start Python and use it as a calulator to solve the following problem.

Lucky Larry bought 75 shares of Google stock at a price of $235.14 per share. Today, shares of Google are priced at $711.25. Using Python’s interactive mode as a calculator, figure out how much profit Larry would make if he sold all of his shares.

>>> (711.25 - 235.14) * 75
35708.25
>>>
Pro-tip: Use the underscore (_) variable to use the result of the last calculation. For example, how much profit does Larry make after his evil broker takes their 20% cut?

>>> _ * 0.80
28566.600000000002
>>>
Exercise 1.2: Getting help
Use the help() command to get help on the abs() function. Then use help() to get help on the round() function. Type help() just by itself with no value to enter the interactive help viewer.

One caution with help() is that it doesn’t work for basic Python statements such as for, if, while, and so forth (i.e., if you type help(for) you’ll get a syntax error). You can try putting the help topic in quotes such as help("for") instead. If that doesn’t work, you’ll have to turn to an internet search.

Followup: Go to http://docs.python.org and find the documentation for the abs() function (hint: it’s found under the library reference related to built-in functions).

Exercise 1.3: Cutting and Pasting
This course is structured as a series of traditional web pages where you are encouraged to try interactive Python code samples by typing them out by hand. If you are learning Python for the first time, this “slow approach” is encouraged. You will get a better feel for the language by slowing down, typing things in, and thinking about what you are doing.

If you must “cut and paste” code samples, select code starting after the >>> prompt and going up to, but not any further than the first blank line or the next >>> prompt (whichever appears first). Select “copy” from the browser, go to the Python window, and select “paste” to copy it into the Python shell. To get the code to run, you may have to hit “Return” once after you’ve pasted it in.

Use cut-and-paste to execute the Python statements in this session:

>>> 12 + 20
32
>>> (3 + 4
         + 5 + 6)
18
>>> for i in range(5):
        print(i)

0
1
2
3
4
>>>
Warning: It is never possible to paste more than one Python command (statements that appear after >>>) to the basic Python shell at a time. You have to paste each command one at a time.

Now that you’ve done this, just remember that you will get more out of the class by typing in code slowly and thinking about it–not cut and pasting.

Exercise 1.4: Where is My Bus?
Try something more advanced and type these statements to find out how long people waiting on the corner of Clark street and Balmoral in Chicago will have to wait for the next northbound CTA #22 bus:

>>> import urllib.request
>>> u = urllib.request.urlopen('http://ctabustracker.com/bustime/map/getStopPredictions.jsp?stop=14791&route=22')
>>> from xml.etree.ElementTree import parse
>>> doc = parse(u)
>>> for pt in doc.findall('.//pt'):
        print(pt.text)

6 MIN
18 MIN
28 MIN
>>>
Yes, you just downloaded a web page, parsed an XML document, and extracted some useful information in about 6 lines of code. The data you accessed is actually feeding the website http://ctabustracker.com/bustime/home.jsp. Try it again and watch the predictions change.

Note: This service only reports arrival times within the next 30 minutes. If you’re in a different timezone and it happens to be 3am in Chicago, you might not get any output. You use the tracker link above to double check.

If the first import statement import urllib.request fails, you’re probably using Python 2. For this course, you need to make sure you’re using Python 3.6 or newer. Go to https://www.python.org to download it if you need it.

If your work environment requires the use of an HTTP proxy server, you may need to set the HTTP_PROXY environment variable to make this part of the exercise work. For example:

>>> import os
>>> os.environ['HTTP_PROXY'] = 'http://yourproxy.server.com'
>>>
If you can’t make this work, don’t worry about it. The rest of this course has nothing to do with parsing XML.